Back in JSBin, I'll start with the primitive types. I'll create a number and assign it a number and
then I log that number.
I won't execute this code right now because I think it's pretty clear what will happen.
I'll then create a new variable, anotherNumber
and I also assign a number and I log anotherNumber.
So let's run this code,
it prints 5 two times.
Next, I set a number equal to 12
and I repeat the two console logs here,
so I print out a number and anotherNumber again.
So what would you expect to show
now?
See that we print four times here, we get 5, 5, 12 and 5 again,
so anotherNumber is still 5 even though a number was changed after being assigned to anotherNumber
and the reason for this is of course the behavior I described. With primitive types, like numbers,
a copy of the value is created and therefore anotherNumber has the value 5 and no reference to a number
,
therefore it doesn't care what I do with a number
and this changes if I switch this with another example. I'll create an array;
1, 2, 3
and first let me remember what type an array has.
So I'll run this code and we see that an array is actually an object, that's important to know because
an object is a reference type.
So if I now create another array and I assign array,
now let me print both
values,
so I print the array and then I print the anotherArray,
what do you think we'll see?
Well we see the array two times, of course because I'm creating it here and then I'm assigning it here
.
Now the interesting part is if I change the array and I'll use a method here to push a new item on
it and I'll come back to array methods in the next module
and now I print both arrays again,
what do you expect to see?
Well, you see that we got 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3 and then 1, 2, 3, 4 two times.
So even though we didn't change another array, it still got changed
and the reason for this is the behavior I just described.
Objects are reference types,
therefore array only holds a reference to this value, to this object
and when we assign array to another array, we copy that reference, this pointer.
Now when I push a new item on array, the value itself is changed,
the two pointers aren't changed and therefore both point to the new value with the additional 4, that
is important to understand.
Now I'll get rid of these two logs and I'll change this code if I don't push a new item on this array
but
instead I set array to let's say an array which holds a and b, two strings.
What do you expect to happen if I now click run?
Well now you see I got a, b and then still 1, 2, 3.
Isn't that against the logic I just planned out?
No, because now I'm creating a new object here and therefore I'm not changing any object to which this
variable was pointing to or to which this pointer was pointing to
but instead, I'm creating a new value with a new pointer. Another array
still has the old pointer to the old value which is still there in memory.
I didn't overwrite it, I just reset or reassigned the array variable with a new pointer to a new value,
therefore
I can now print out both
and that's the difference. With array push,
I was editing an existing object,
so both variables with the identical pointer were therefore updated
and with this approach here, I'm actually creating a new value,
therefore another array doesn't care about this.
It's very important that you understand this difference between primitives and reference types because
the behavior of reference types can lead to many bugs or to confusion at least when your code doesn't
work the way you expect it to work because suddenly, a value doesn't have the value you expect it to have
or a variable doesn't have the value you expect it to have because you forgot that the variable was
actually holding a pointer to a value which got changed in some other place in your app,
maybe in another file.
So this is extremely important to keep in mind and to understand. This is how Javascript works and how
these two different types of types,
these two different categories of types, work.